---
date: 2026-06-24
categories:
  - Release notes
---

# Release v0.54.0

Welcome to Perses v0.54.0! In this release, on top of many improvements and bug fixes, we have introduced several
changes that break the compatibility with previous versions. Please review the breaking changes section carefully before
upgrading.

These changes have been thinking carefully to improve the overall user experience and maintainability of Perses. We hope
even if it will make the upgrade process a bit more complex, you will stay with us and enjoy the benefits of these
improvements.

While you can read this blog post to have details about the changes and how to upgrade, we are also providing a
[migration guide](https://github.com/perses/perses/blob/main/docs/upgrade-guide.md) that is more condensed and focused
on the steps required to upgrade from previous versions to v0.54.0.

<!-- more -->

## Security issues

On top of the various features and improvements, we have fixed several security issues in this release that compromised
the permission system of the Perses application. We strongly recommend to upgrade to this version as soon as possible.

### Use query parameter project to list resources without having access to ([CVE-2026-63458](https://github.com/perses/perses/security/advisories/GHSA-cjgj-2fwf-4c2w))

In previous versions, it was possible to list resources (dashboards, datasources, etc.) that you don't have access to by
using the query parameter `project` in the API.

For example, if you have access to the project `project-a` but not to `project-b`, you could list all dashboards in
`project-b` by calling the API endpoint `/api/v1/dashboards?project=project-b`. This would return a list of dashboards
in `project-b` even if you don't have access to that project.

Now, if you try to list resources that you don't have access to, you will get a 403 Forbidden error.

### Unvalidated project parameter enables filesystem path traversal ([CVE-2026-63445](https://github.com/perses/perses/security/advisories/GHSA-vr5f-w35q-98jp))

In previous versions, it was possible to use the `project` query parameter to access files outside the Perses
installation directory. This could be exploited by an attacker to read sensitive files on the server.

It was also possible to use this query parameter to get access to other resources contained in the database by using a
project name that contains a path traversal sequence (e.g. `../secrets`).

For example `/api/v1/dashboards?project=../projects` returns the list of the project while it must not return anything.

Now, if you try to use a project name that contains a path traversal sequence, you will get a 400 Bad Request error.

Note that this attack is not possible if you are using an SQL database instead of the default fileSystem database.

### Missing authorization in datasource proxy allows cross-scope secret disclosure ([CVE-2026-63199](https://github.com/perses/perses/security/advisories/GHSA-4227-9989-jrhx))

In previous versions, it was possible to contact datasources protected by secrets that you don't necessary have access
to by using the datasource proxy.

This was because the datasource proxy did not check if you have access to the secret used to connect to the datasource
while testing the connection to the same datasource.

Now, if you are creating a datasource or testing a connection to a datasource, the datasource proxy will check if you
have access to the secret used to connect to the datasource. If you don't have access to the secret, you will get a 403
Forbidden error.

## Introduction of the Perses specification

We have created a new repository called [perses/spec](https://github.com/perses/spec) that contains the Dashboard and
Datasource specifications in different languages (Go, TypeScript, Cuelang).

The goal of this repository is to provide a single source of truth for the specifications and to make it easier for
developers to work with them in different programming languages independently of the Perses project.

The specifications are now used in the Perses app, in the Go and CUE SDK and in the CLI. It means if you are a user of
the SDK and/or the CLI, you will need to update your code to use the new specifications and to upgrade the CLI to
v0.54.0.

## By configuration, enable or disable plugins

As we are adding more and more plugins to Perses, we have introduced a new configuration option to enable or disable
plugins. This allows users to have a more fine-grained control over which plugins are available in their Perses
instance, and reduce noise and issues with plugins that are not used.

For example with the following configuration:

```yaml
plugin:
  disabled:
    - "pyroscope"
    - "victoriaLogs"
    - "clickHouse"
    - "tempo"
```

The only datasource enable will be Prometheus in the default Perses installation.

Another way to achieve the same result is to explicitly enable only the plugins you want to use:

```yaml
plugin:
  enabled:
    - "prometheus"
```

In this example, only the Prometheus plugin will be enabled and all other plugins will be disabled.

Note that, a consequence of this configuration is that every panels, variables and queries are also disabled.

And it also means that if you add a new plugin in the future, it will be disabled by default and you will need to
explicitly enable it in the configuration.

## Annotations

TODO

## Keyboard shortcuts

TODO

## Sub-folder support

TODO

## New plugins

TODO

### Jaeger

TODO

### GreptimeDB

TODO

### Splunk

TODO

### Alertmanager

TODO

### LogExporter

TODO

<!-- Add more section if necessary -->
