---
date: 2026-01-31
categories:
  - Release notes
---

# Release v0.53.0

Welcome to Perses v0.53.0! In this release, on top of many improvements and bug fixes, we have introduced several
changes that break the compatibility with previous versions.

These changes have been thinking carefully to improve the overall user experience and maintainability of Perses. We hope
even if it will make the upgrade process a bit more complex, you will stay with us and enjoy the benefits of these
improvements.

While you can read this blog post to have details about the changes and how to upgrade, we are also providing a
[migration guide](https://perses.dev/perses/docs/upgrade-guide/) that is more condensed and focused on the steps
required to upgrade from previous versions to v0.53.0.

On a different topic, we are happy to being able to list [Logz.io](https://logz.io/) as a new officially company using
Perses in production. Welcome to the Perses community!

If you are a company using Perses or contributing to it and want to be listed as an adopter, please follow
the [guideline](../../adopters.md). It is always great to see more and more companies trusting Perses for their
monitoring needs. And it will help us to grow the community and make Perses even better.

As usual, this blog post does not cover all the changes and improvements included in this release. We are only talking
about the changes that should interest you the most. If you want to have a complete list of all the changes, please
refer to the [changelog](https://github.com/perses/perses/releases/tag/v0.53.0)

<!-- more -->

## Introduction of plugin version and registry

To enhance the management of plugins specially when dealing with upgrading a plugin version that may introduce breaking
changes, we introduced a new field in the plugin specification called `metadata`. It includes a `version` field that
allows to specify the version of the plugin and the `registry` field that indicates the source registry of the plugin.

Now a plugin specification looks like this:

```yaml
kind: TimeSeriesChart
metadata:
  version: v0.1.0
  registry: perses.dev
spec:
# ... rest of the plugin spec
```

Note that the version is following the semantic versioning format (semver) and this is enforced during the loading of
the plugin.

This change is important as it will allow in the future to manage multiple versions of the same plugin and facilitate
the migration from one version to another. We are planning to introduce automatic migration tools in future releases to
help users upgrade their plugins seamlessly. Excepting if a plugin is introducing breaking changes that cannot be
automatically handled, the upgrade process will be handled by the Perses backend using cuelang script contained in the
plugin package.

### What does it change?

For **end users** using the Perses application, this change is transparent and does not require any action.

However, for **plugin developers**, you will need to update the CLI to the last version. This is required as the API
handling the load of the plugins in development has changed. Therefore, previous versions of the CLI won't be able to
send the data to the server to load plugin in development. The error returned by the server will be 405 (Method Not
Allowed). (see https://github.com/perses/perses/issues/3789)

If you want to see the changes and more details regarding how it is implemented, they are available in this
PR: https://github.com/perses/perses/pull/3711

## TLS config changes

We are introducing a breaking change in the TLS configuration to have a consistent syntax to define TLS settings across
all data-sources specifications and across all backend sub configurations.

The previous version was mixing two syntaxes to set TLS across the various possible configuration that could lead to
confusion (camelCase and snake_case).
This breaking change is impacting only the SQL database configuration.

In the SQL configuration, if the tls_config is used, then you should change your config like that:

```txt
ca_file -> caFile
cert_file -> certFile
key_file -> keyFile
server_name -> serverName
insecure_skip_verify -> insecureSkipVerify
min_version -> minVersion
max_version -> maxVersion
```

## User used in the container

In order to simplify the build of the docker image, we have changed the default user used in the container from `nobody`
to `nonroot`. As a based image we are using now `gcr.io/distroless/static-debian12:non-root` instead of
`ggcr.io/distroless/static-debian12:latest`, which gives us a non-root user by default.

### What does it change?

This change can impact users that is using as a database the file system inside the container, specially when running
the container with docker (not within Kubernetes). In that case, you should ensure that the `nonroot` user has the right
permissions to read and write into the database folder. If this is not the case, when upgrading the image, you will face
permission errors when Perses is trying to load the data coming from the file system.

## Authentication changes

A new **OIDC logout endpoint** has been added to the API, allowing users to log out both from Perses and from their OIDC
provider, respecting
the [OpenID Connect RP-Initiated Logout 1.0](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-rpinitiated-1_0.html)
specification.
This is mainly used by the frontend to ensure a proper provider-side logout when a user signs out.  
The feature is currently in **beta** and **disabled by default**. It has been successfully tested with **Azure AD**
and **Keycloak**, so feel free to try it out.

We also introduced several improvements to the generic **OIDC/OAuth2** provider system:

- The `apiPrefix` configuration is now correctly applied during login redirections.
- The OAuth2/OIDC `state` parameter is now more secure, enabling compatibility with providers such as **Authelia**.

## Improving "Run Query" button behavior in MultiQueryEditor

### What does it change?

If you are developing plugin specially query plugin or embedding MultiQueryEditor in your app, these changes will impact
you,
and you need to follow these guidelines.

`MultiQueryEditor` component has a new mandatory method: `onQueryRun`. It will be called when the user click on the
button "Run Query". It's useful if you want to execute a query only when this button is clicked and not on every
`onChange` (previous Perses behavior). Now the `onChange` method is always called when something change in the editor.
On the Perses app, queries are only executed when the user click on the "Run Query" button, however changes are still
saved
if user save the dashboard without clicking on "Run Query". But embedded use-cases might want to execute queries on
every change,
so this new behavior allows both use-cases.

In parallel, the caching of queries has been greatly improved to avoid memory leaks on dashboard refresh. More info can
be found in related PR: [#3518](https://github.com/perses/perses/pull/3518)
And queries errors are now displayed at the query level (before it was only displayed at the panel level, could be hard
to know which queries are causing issues).

About the breaking change, your code should change from this:

```tsx
export function FooExplorer(): ReactElement {
    const {
        data: {queries = []},
        setData,
    } = useExplorerManagerContext<FooExplorerQueryParams>();

    return (
        <Stack gap={2} sx={{width: '100%'}}>
            <MultiQueryEditor
                queryTypes={['ProfileQuery']}
                queries={queries}
                onChange={(newQueries) => setData({queries: queryDefinitions})}
            />
            <FooPanel queries={queries}/>
        </Stack>
    );
}
```

to this:

```tsx
export function FooExplorer(): ReactElement {
    const {
        data: {queries = []},
        setData,
    } = useExplorerManagerContext<FooExplorerQueryParams>();

    const [queryDefinitions, setQueryDefinitions] = useState<QueryDefinition[]>(queries);

    return (
        <Stack gap={2} sx={{width: '100%'}}>
            <MultiQueryEditor
                queryTypes={['ProfileQuery']}
                queries={queryDefinitions}
                onChange={(newQueries) => setQueryDefinitions(newQueries)}
                onQueryRun={() => setData({queries: queryDefinitions})}
            />
            <FooPanel queries={queries}/>
        </Stack>
    );
}
```

## Variable migration changes

We realized variable migration script could be simplified & better follow CUE's good practices by replacing condition
blocks by constraints defined on the variable object. However to enable this we had to introduce a breaking change*:
where previously such schema was describing the remapping of a Grafana variable object named `#var`, it is now called
`#grafanaVar`. Thus, if you had defined a schema looking like this:

```cue
package migrate

import "strings"

#var: _ 

if #var.type == "custom" || #var.type == "interval" {
    kind: "MyVariable"
    spec: {
        values: strings.Split(#var.query, ",")
    }
}
```

..the minimum change you need to do is this renaming:

```cue
package migrate

import "strings"

#grafanaVar: _ 

if #grafanaVar.type == "custom" || #grafanaVar.type == "interval" {
    kind: "MyVariable"
    spec: {
        values: strings.Split(#grafanaVar.query, ",")
    }
}
```

Then it is recommended to refactor to something like this:

```cue
package migrate

import "strings"

#grafanaVar: {
    type: "custom" | "interval"
    query: string
    ...
}

kind: "MyVariable"
spec: {
    values: strings.Split(#grafanaVar.query, ",")
}
```

*We believe the trade‑off was worth introducing this breaking change, as we expect very few (if any) people to have
written such variable migration schemas outside of the Perses organization. However, if you are impacted, please reach
out to us! Learning more about our community helps us make better future decisions by having a clearer understanding of
potential impacts.

## Introducing i18n support

This new version is introducing internationalization (i18n) support in the frontend, allowing to easily add new
languages and provide a better experience for non-English speaking users. The i18n implementation is based on the widely
used `react-i18next` library, which provides a powerful and flexible solution for managing translations in React
applications.

For the moment, the il8n is really limited as it only contains a few translations for few languages. The main goal of
this change is mainly to get the i18n support in place and have a framework to easily add new translations in the
future.

## Kubernetes Auth

This release introduces Kubernetes authentication and authorization providers, enables authorization decisions for users
based on Kubernetes RBAC checks against Perses CRDs. This change marks a forward step in Perses Kubernetes integration
story, allowing Perses CRDs to not just create resources but be used in conjunction with Kubernetes `Roles` and
`RoleBindings` to provide access checks for users within Perses itself. Due to the variety of authentication providers
for Kubernetes, the implementation is designed to be provider agnostic. When enabled, Perses expects requests to contain
an `Authorization` header in the form of `Authorization: Bearer XXXX`. The token is used to authenticate against the
Kubernetes API Server and check if the user has permission to requested namespaces and resources.

The concept of authorization providers has been added with this change, marking the
`.security.authorization.guest_permissions` and `.security.authorization.check_latest_update_interval` fields as
deprecated, moving them to the "native" authorization provider. These fields will be removed in a future release.

```yaml
security:
  authorization:
    provider:
      native:
        enable: true
        check_latest_update_interval: 5m
        guest_permissions:
        # ...
```

The frontend and percli have been updated to support these new providers. An `/api/v1/user/whoami` endpoint has been
created to return user information for a logged in user. The percli has had `--kube` and `--kubeconfig-file` flags added
which use the bearer token present in a kubeconfig file to authenticate with the Perses backend.

```sh
percli login --kube --kubeconfig-file="./kubeconfig" http://localhost:8080
successfully logged in http://localhost:8080
```

The Kubernetes authentication and authorization providers must be enabled together. When enabled, the Perses backend
will use its pod's service account to authenticate and authorize users. The service account should be given
`TokenReview` and `SubjectAccessReview` create and `Namespace` list permissions. The authenticator and authorizer
provider configurations are exposed as configuration options:

```yaml
security:
  enable_auth: true
  authorization:
    provider:
      kubernetes:
        enable: true
        qps: 500
        burst: 1000
        authorizer_allow_ttl: 5m
        authorizer_deny_ttl: 30s
        authenticator_ttl: 2m
  authentication:
    providers:
      kubernetes:
        enable: true
```

## CLI improvements

- `plugin test-schemas` has been improved to test that the actual migrated schemas are valid against the expected
  schemas.
- `plugin start` is now able to discover the port used by rspack to serve the plugin in development mode, so you don't
  need to provide it anymore.
    - There was also an issue when loading a plugin in development with no schema defined, it is now fixed.
    - When stoping the command, there was some orphan process left, it is now fixed.
    - As mentioned before, the CLI has been updated to be compatible with the new dev plugin API introduced in this
      release.
- `lint`: when you were using local plugin to validate the dashboards, it was mandatory to have the plugins extracted in
  a folder. Now you can also provide the plugins as an archive like it is the case for the Perses server. The command
  will extract the plugins before starting validating any data.

## Plugin improvements

// TODO list of improvements, ideally give major changes and improvements for each plugin.

### GO-SDK Change in the way to define a query plugin

In the previous version of the GO-SDK, a query plugin was defined by using the Query builder. The issue with this
approach is that it was not possible to provide the high level query type as it was hardcoded in the query builder.

This was not a problem for the Perses app as we only have one query type until recently. It changed with the
introduction of the new query types:  "ProfileQuery", "LogQuery" and "TraceQuery". To support this new use-case, we had
to introduce a breaking change in the way to define a query plugin.

Now, instead of using the Query builder, you need to fill a struct `query.Option` that contains the query plugin and the
high level query type.

If we take the Prometheus plugin as an example, the implementation will change from this:

```go
package query

import (
	"github.com/perses/perses/go-sdk/query"
)

func PromQL(expr string, options ...Option) query.Option {
	return func(builder *query.Builder) error {
		plugin, err := create(expr, options...)
		if err != nil {
			return err
		}

		builder.Spec.Plugin.Kind = PluginKind
		builder.Spec.Plugin.Spec = plugin
		return nil
	}
}

```

to this:

```go
package query

import (
	"github.com/perses/perses/go-sdk/query"
	"github.com/perses/perses/pkg/model/api/v1/common"
	"github.com/perses/perses/pkg/model/api/v1/plugin"
)

func PromQL(expr string, options ...Option) query.Option {
	plg, err := create(expr, options...)
	return query.Option{
		Kind: plugin.KindTimeSeriesQuery,
		Plugin: common.Plugin{
			Kind: PluginKind,
			Spec: plg,
		},
		Error: err,
	}
}

```

### Support of temperature units

Celsius (°C) and Fahrenheit (°F) temperature units are now available for panel plugins that support unit configuration.

### Introducing VictoriaLogs and ClickHouse as new data-sources

On top of that, this release is also introducing two new data-sources: VictoriaLogs and ClickHouse provided directly by
the community.

// TODO: write more about these two data-sources, highlight their features, and who did it.

Note that since these two data-sources are provided by the community, they are not officially supported by the Perses
team.
And as such, soon we will come with a governance model to manage community plugins. In later release, these plugins
might be removed in the main images, depending on the governance adopted. You will still be able to use them by
installing the datasources in your Perses instance.

### Support of Dashboard Tags

This release adds support for dashboard tags, allowing users to organize and categorize their dashboards more effectively. Tags provide a convenient way to search for and filter dashboards. You can assign multiple tags to any dashboard and use them to quickly find related dashboards across your Perses instance.
